ORACLE_TO_SQLSERVER_CONVERSION.md, before:

# Oracle to SQL Server Conversion Guide

The code has been provided as part of the open source output for the Landis Portal database conversion project.

http://www.landis.org.uk

Author: Stephen Hallett, Cranfield University
Date: 2025-10-19

## Overview

This project provides a comprehensive solution for converting Oracle SQL DDL and DML statements to SQL Server format. The conversion handles complex data type mappings, syntax differences, and data integrity issues that commonly occur when migrating from Oracle to SQL Server.

## Files

### Core Files
- **`oracle_to_sqlserver_converter.py`** - Main conversion script with comprehensive fixes
- **`oracletables.sql`** - Original Oracle database export (204 MB, 713,526 lines)
- **`sample.py`** - Sample conversion script for testing
- **`sample.sql`** - Sample Oracle data for testing

### Generated Output Files
- **`oracletables_sqlserver_definitions.sql`** - Converted table definitions (24.7 KB)
- **`oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_all.sql`** - All INSERT statements (180.7 MB)
- **`oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_01.sql` through `chunk_08.sql`** - INSERT statements split into 100,000-line chunks

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.6 or higher
- Oracle SQL export file
- SQL Server database

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Convert Oracle SQL to SQL Server format
python3 oracle_to_sqlserver_converter.py oracletables.sql

# The script will generate:
# - Table definitions file
# - All INSERT statements file  
# - Chunked INSERT files (8 files of ~100,000 lines each)
```

### Execution Order

1. **First**: Run the table definitions
   ```sql
   -- Execute in SQL Server
   oracletables_sqlserver_definitions.sql
   ```

2. **Then**: Run the data chunks in order
   ```sql
   -- Execute in SQL Server (in order)
   oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_01.sql
   oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_02.sql
   ...
   oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_07.sql
   oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_08.sql
   ```

## Conversion Features

### Data Type Mappings

| Oracle Type | SQL Server Type | Notes |
|--------------|-----------------|-------|
| `NUMBER` | `DECIMAL(18,0)` | Default precision |
| `NUMBER(1)` | `BIT` | Boolean values |
| `NUMBER(3)` | `TINYINT` | Small integers |
| `NUMBER(5)` | `SMALLINT` | Medium integers |
| `NUMBER(10)` | `INT` | Standard integers |
| `NUMBER(19)` | `BIGINT` | Large integers |
| `VARCHAR2` | `NVARCHAR` | Unicode strings |
| `VARCHAR` | `NVARCHAR` | Unicode strings |
| `CHAR` | `NCHAR` | Unicode fixed strings |
| `DATE` | `DATETIME2` | Date/time values |
| `TIMESTAMP` | `DATETIME2` | High-precision timestamps |

### Function Conversions

| Oracle Function | SQL Server Function | Notes |
|-----------------|-------------------|-------|
| `to_date()` | Direct value | Removes function wrapper |
| `to_timestamp()` | Direct value | Removes function wrapper |
| `sysdate` | `GETDATE()` | Current date/time |
| `systimestamp` | `GETDATE()` | Current timestamp |

### Syntax Fixes

#### CREATE TABLE Statements
- Adds `DROP TABLE IF EXISTS` before each table
- Converts column names to bracketed format: `[COLUMN_NAME]`
- Adds proper commas between column definitions
- Handles Oracle-specific constraints

#### INSERT Statements
- Converts to bracketed column format: `[TABLE_NAME].[COLUMN_NAME]`
- Adds `VALUES` keyword where missing
- Converts Oracle functions to SQL Server equivalents

## Comprehensive Data Fixes

The conversion script includes extensive fixes for common data issues:

### 1. Apostrophe Escaping
**Problem**: Oracle uses `''` for escaped quotes, SQL Server uses `''`
**Solution**: Automatically converts all single quotes to double quotes within string values

```sql
-- Oracle: 'It''s a test'
-- SQL Server: 'It''s a test'
```

### 2. Browser User Agent Strings
**Problem**: Browser strings like `rv:11.0` cause SQL Server label conflicts
**Solution**: Converts `rv:11.0` to `version11.0` to avoid label conflicts

### 3. Long Identifiers
**Problem**: Repeated text creates identifiers longer than 128 characters
**Solution**: Truncates long strings to 100 characters with `... [TRUNCATED]`

### 4. Scientific Notation
**Problem**: Out-of-range scientific notation values cause errors
**Solution**: Replaces problematic values with `NULL`

### 5. Malformed Data
**Problem**: Incomplete or malformed INSERT statements
**Solution**: Comments out malformed lines as `-- SKIPPED MALFORMED LINE`

### 6. Extra Parentheses
**Problem**: Malformed VALUES clauses with extra closing parentheses
**Solution**: Automatically fixes `'););` to `');`

### 7. SQL Keywords in Strings
**Problem**: SQL keywords within string values cause parsing errors
**Solution**: Replaces problematic keywords:
- `about` → `abt`
- `with` → `w/`
- `select` → `sel`
- `insert` → `ins`
- `update` → `upd`
- `delete` → `del`
- `create` → `cr`
- `drop` → `dr`
- `alter` → `alt`

### 8. Oracle-Specific Statements
**Problem**: Oracle-specific commands not supported in SQL Server
**Solution**: Comments out statements like `USE`, `SET DEFINE`, `ALTER SESSION`

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Syntax Errors**: Ensure you're using the latest version of the conversion script
2. **Memory Issues**: The script processes large files efficiently with streaming
3. **Encoding Issues**: The script handles UTF-8 encoding automatically

### Error Messages

If you encounter errors, check:
1. Python version (3.6+ required)
2. File permissions
3. Available disk space
4. Input file format (should be Oracle SQL export)

## Advanced Usage

### Custom Schema Name
```python
converter = OracleToSQLServerConverter('input.sql', schema_name='CUSTOM_SCHEMA')
```

### Custom Output File
```python
converter = OracleToSQLServerConverter('input.sql', output_file='custom_output.sql')
```

## Performance Notes

- **Processing Speed**: ~10,000 lines per second on modern hardware
- **Memory Usage**: Streams data to avoid memory issues with large files
- **File Size**: Original 204 MB Oracle file produces ~200 MB of SQL Server files

## Validation

After conversion, verify:
1. All tables were created successfully
2. Row counts match between Oracle and SQL Server
3. Data types are appropriate for your use case
4. No syntax errors in SQL Server execution

## Support

For issues or questions:
1. Check the conversion logs for specific error messages
2. Verify input file format matches Oracle SQL export standards
3. Ensure SQL Server version compatibility (2016+ recommended)

## Version History

- **v1.0**: Basic Oracle to SQL Server conversion
- **v2.0**: Added comprehensive data fixes and error handling
- **v3.0**: Improved apostrophe escaping and multi-line VALUES support
- **v4.0**: Complete rewrite with all known issues resolved

---

*This conversion tool has been tested with large-scale Oracle databases and handles complex data scenarios automatically.*

Commit message:

Enhance Oracle to SQL Server conversion documentation by clarifying file descriptions and updating usage instructions. Added details on input file creation and improved output file naming for better understanding.

ORACLE_TO_SQLSERVER_CONVERSION.md, after:

# Oracle to SQL Server Conversion Guide

The code has been provided as part of the open source output for the Landis Portal database conversion project.

http://www.landis.org.uk

Author: Stephen Hallett, Cranfield University
Date: 2025-10-19

## Overview

This project provides a comprehensive solution for converting Oracle SQL DDL and DML statements to SQL Server format. The conversion handles complex data type mappings, syntax differences, and data integrity issues that commonly occur when migrating from Oracle to SQL Server.

## Files

### Core Files
- **`oracle_to_sqlserver_converter.py`** - Main conversion script with comprehensive fixes
- **`oracletables.sql`** - Original Oracle database export
- **`sample.py`** - Sample conversion script for testing
- **`sample.sql`** - Sample Oracle data for testing

### Generated Output Files
- **`oracletables_sqlserver_definitions.sql`** - Converted table definitions
- **`oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_all.sql`** - All INSERT statements
- **`oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_01.sql` through `chunk_08.sql`** - INSERT statements split into 100,000-line chunks

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.6 or higher
- Oracle SQL export file
- SQL Server database

### Basic Usage

An Oracle DDL SQL file with tabe definitions and INSERT statements is creted as an export file in a tool such as Oracle SQL Developer. This is the input file for processing, e.g. 'oracletables.sql'.

```bash
# Convert Oracle SQL to SQL Server format
python3 oracle_to_sqlserver_converter.py oracletables.sql

# The script will generate:
# - SQL Table definitions file
# - All INSERT statements file (for ALL data rows)
# - Chunked INSERT files (8 files of ~100,000 lines each)
```

### Execution Order

1. **First**: Run the table definitions
   ```sql
   -- Execute in SQL Server
   oracletables_sqlserver_definitions.sql
   ```

2. **Then**: Run the data chunks in order
   ```sql
   -- Execute in SQL Server (in order)
   oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_01.sql
   oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_02.sql
   ...
   oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_07.sql
   oracletables_sqlserver_inserts_chunk_08.sql
   ```

## Conversion Features

### Data Type Mappings

| Oracle Type | SQL Server Type | Notes |
|--------------|-----------------|-------|
| `NUMBER` | `DECIMAL(18,0)` | Default precision |
| `NUMBER(1)` | `BIT` | Boolean values |
| `NUMBER(3)` | `TINYINT` | Small integers |
| `NUMBER(5)` | `SMALLINT` | Medium integers |
| `NUMBER(10)` | `INT` | Standard integers |
| `NUMBER(19)` | `BIGINT` | Large integers |
| `VARCHAR2` | `NVARCHAR` | Unicode strings |
| `VARCHAR` | `NVARCHAR` | Unicode strings |
| `CHAR` | `NCHAR` | Unicode fixed strings |
| `DATE` | `DATETIME2` | Date/time values |
| `TIMESTAMP` | `DATETIME2` | High-precision timestamps |

### Function Conversions

| Oracle Function | SQL Server Function | Notes |
|-----------------|-------------------|-------|
| `to_date()` | Direct value | Removes function wrapper |
| `to_timestamp()` | Direct value | Removes function wrapper |
| `sysdate` | `GETDATE()` | Current date/time |
| `systimestamp` | `GETDATE()` | Current timestamp |

### Syntax Fixes

#### CREATE TABLE Statements
- Adds `DROP TABLE IF EXISTS` before each table
- Converts column names to bracketed format: `[COLUMN_NAME]`
- Adds proper commas between column definitions
- Handles Oracle-specific constraints

#### INSERT Statements
- Converts to bracketed column format: `[TABLE_NAME].[COLUMN_NAME]`
- Adds `VALUES` keyword where missing
- Converts Oracle functions to SQL Server equivalents

## Comprehensive Data Fixes

The conversion script includes extensive fixes for common data issues:

### 1. Apostrophe Escaping
**Problem**: Oracle uses `''` for escaped quotes, SQL Server uses `''`
**Solution**: Automatically converts all single quotes to double quotes within string values

```sql
-- Oracle: 'It''s a test'
-- SQL Server: 'It''s a test'
```

### 2. Browser User Agent Strings
**Problem**: Browser strings like `rv:11.0` cause SQL Server label conflicts
**Solution**: Converts `rv:11.0` to `version11.0` to avoid label conflicts

### 3. Long Identifiers
**Problem**: Repeated text creates identifiers longer than 128 characters
**Solution**: Truncates long strings to 100 characters with `... [TRUNCATED]`

### 4. Scientific Notation
**Problem**: Out-of-range scientific notation values cause errors
**Solution**: Replaces problematic values with `NULL`

### 5. Malformed Data
**Problem**: Incomplete or malformed INSERT statements
**Solution**: Comments out malformed lines as `-- SKIPPED MALFORMED LINE`

### 6. Extra Parentheses
**Problem**: Malformed VALUES clauses with extra closing parentheses
**Solution**: Automatically fixes `'););` to `');`

### 7. SQL Keywords in Strings
**Problem**: SQL keywords within string values cause parsing errors
**Solution**: Replaces problematic keywords:
- `about` → `abt`
- `with` → `w/`
- `select` → `sel`
- `insert` → `ins`
- `update` → `upd`
- `delete` → `del`
- `create` → `cr`
- `drop` → `dr`
- `alter` → `alt`

### 8. Oracle-Specific Statements
**Problem**: Oracle-specific commands not supported in SQL Server
**Solution**: Comments out statements like `USE`, `SET DEFINE`, `ALTER SESSION`

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **Syntax Errors**: Ensure you're using the latest version of the conversion script
2. **Memory Issues**: The script processes large files efficiently with streaming
3. **Encoding Issues**: The script handles UTF-8 encoding automatically

### Error Messages

If you encounter errors, check:
1. Python version (3.6+ required)
2. File permissions
3. Available disk space
4. Input file format (should be Oracle SQL export)

## Advanced Usage

### Custom Schema Name
```python
converter = OracleToSQLServerConverter('input.sql', schema_name='CUSTOM_SCHEMA')
```

### Custom Output File
```python
converter = OracleToSQLServerConverter('input.sql', output_file='custom_output.sql')
```

## Performance Notes

- **Processing Speed**: ~10,000 lines per second on modern hardware
- **Memory Usage**: Streams data to avoid memory issues with large files
- **File Size**: Original 204 MB Oracle file produces ~200 MB of SQL Server files

## Validation

After conversion, verify:
1. All tables were created successfully
2. Row counts match between Oracle and SQL Server
3. Data types are appropriate for your use case
4. No syntax errors in SQL Server execution

## Support

For issues or questions:
1. Check the conversion logs for specific error messages
2. Verify input file format matches Oracle SQL export standards
3. Ensure SQL Server version compatibility (2016+ recommended)

## Version History

- **v1.0**: Basic Oracle to SQL Server conversion
- **v2.0**: Added comprehensive data fixes and error handling
- **v3.0**: Improved apostrophe escaping and multi-line VALUES support
- **v4.0**: Complete rewrite with all known issues resolved

---

*This conversion tool has been tested with large-scale Oracle databases and handles complex data scenarios automatically.*
